# Human Cognition and Perception

One lens of looking at how we perceive is to split it into three layers, stacked vertically.

## Logical

The top layer is logical. Our emotions and fundumental reactions to things often influence and bias our logical thinking process. In emotionally charged situtations, we often make an emotional decision then logically rationalize it after the fact. It can be possible to create systems that remove emotional bias, such as science. A healthy debate about how to structure code is using logic.

## Emotional

The middle layer is emotional. This is the realm of body language, atmospheres and how we feel. This is an extremely powerful layer, and often negotiation involves convincing the other person emotionally which then inevitably leads to a positive outcome. A team with a good atmosphere means a positive feeling between team members, and everyone wants to eat lunch together.

## Archetypical

The bottom layer is archetypical. This is the realm of story. Ask yourself, what is the story and where are you and everyone else within that story? At a fundumental level we seem to use this structure as the pre-built way we organize our perception. It is possible to modify the story that we live in by hearing stories then internalizing them. The three main categories of our internal stories, which also have a good / evil dimension, are Order (wise king, evil tyrant), Chaos (creative bountiful nature, cancer and anarchy) and Individual (hero, villan). 

In general religions tend to provide a complete story, with all dimensions repersented. Ideologies are often missing elements, but are still compelling since they hook into the same 'engine' that powers religion. e.g. American Manifest Destiny was only wise civilizing culture, negative brutish nature and natives, and positive heroic conquering individual. Environmentalist culture is only evil opressive society, beautiful virgin nature, and negative greedy individual.

There are two parts to organizing our perception here. First, it is important in a society that we all have a shared story that we live in, preferably with all of the dimensions repersented. Without a shared story it becomes impossible to communicate, since fundumentally communicating involves placing yourself and others as characters within that story. 

Second, as mentioned previously, we need to negotiate where each of us are relative to one another within that story. 

A team moving together through a shared story can create the most powerful bonds. It creates a deep sense of shared meaning, that is the tinglies you get at the movies when Professor X and Magneto band together to overcome something greater.

It seems that fundumental values get built into this layer. Let's take the case of a wife cheating on her husband. In the traditional Christian view the story is cheating is a sin that should be punishable by stoning, but since we all sin none of us should be so arrogant to judge and stone her, so in a sense it shouldn't be punished. That's quite a nuanced position, and we could easily put ourselves and others in either role, so if we both agree on the 'story' we can use it to show each other some mercy.

The story is interesting on many levels, since there is the obvious message, "You should be faithful." which is useful. But, you could eaisly swap in the sin (put any 'ol bad thing you do in there) with something else, and you could eaisly be the sinner or the person wanting to throw the stone.

## Conclusion

It seems that if you can convice someone something at a fundumental, it will in a sense 'bubble up' to the higher layers. The definitely works for Emotional -> Logical, but I suspect this works for Archetypical -> Emotional as well. 

The basic categories that existed throughout our evolutionary history, such as family and heirarchy, seem to become extended metaphors in our societies. For example, everyone in my country feels a bit like my 'brothers and sisters' and the president feels a bit like 'father'.

Peterson understands this, and sees religion as the most effective way to convice people to adopt a shared complete story on a mass scale. He doesn't want to say God exists or not since answering that would aileniate athiests, which are the people he is trying to convice, since they do not have the shared story.

Without a shared story we cannot communicate, since our fundumental layer of perception is a story, in which we place ourselves and others. We can choose to communicate, or we can choose to fight.



 good and the bad guy band together to ove
 rcome a greater common enemy together.


Ideologies often are missing elements, such as the positive aspect of order is missing, but are still relatively powerful since they 

such as Order is always the evil tyrant and Chaos is always positive creative nature. 

 Our internal story has the standard good / evil dimension with the three elements, 

A shared story for a team can create immensely powerful bonds and a deep feeling of meaning.

In some cases, we make an emotional decision

One lens of looking at how we think is splitting  